Chapter 1: Decision


Twilight stood frozen, as she stared at the horn on the ground before her. “It can’t be…” She whispered as she started to get over the shock. Creeping forward, she reached out a hoof to touch the horn.

It was cold. Not the frigid cold of ice, but rather the creeping cold of a shadow blocking the warmth of the sun. When nothing worse happened, Twilight gingerly picked it up to examine more closely. There was no mistaking it; this was King Sombra’s horn. From the deep, blood red color, to the sinisterly pointed tip, to its elegant curve.

Twilight paused at that. Perhaps it was having read his journal that made her want to see another side to him, but it still felt odd to think of any part of the cruel tyrant as ‘elegant’. Shaking away such thoughts, Twilight pondered what to do with it.

“I suppose I should take this to Cadance,” Twilight said to herself.

“’Tis not enough that my physical form was shattered, but now you would deny me even this half-existence?”

Twilight shrieked and dropped the horn as a sinister whisper seemed to echo all around her. “W-what!? Who? Where?” Staring at the horn on the ground, she realized that it was the source of the voice.

“Defending yourself is understandable, but crushing your foe when he is already helpless?” The voice, which Twilight now realized had to be King Sombra’s, went on. “I thought you ponies considered yourselves better than that.”

Hearing the disdain in his voice, Twilight protested, “We are! Besides, I never said anything about ‘crushing you’!”

“And yet you intend to drag me, powerless, before the Crystal Princess.” Sombra shot back without hesitation. “What do you think she would do? I’ll tell you, she would expose me to that accursed Crystal Heart, and let its power wipe the last of my remnants from existence.”

Twilight opened her mouth to argue but stopped short. Sombra had nearly re-conquered the Empire, and his mere presence had thrown everypony into a panic. She wanted to believe that Cadence would be reasonable about it, but she really did not know how Cadence would react to finding out Sombra was alive… sort of.

Scowling, Twilight shouted, “Well, what do you expect me to do? I can’t just let you roam free, after all that you’ve done!”

However, silence was her only reply. After a moment, Twilight realized she was yelling at a dismembered horn. Suddenly, she wasn’t sure if she had really heard a voice at all. She was glad there was nopony else around, or else she would have looked crazy.

Sighing, Twilight picked up the horn and tucked it into the saddlebags she had brought along to carry anything of interest she found. “I guess maybe this place is getting to me,” Twilight muttered, before turning to the stairs and beginning the long ascent back up.

“Twilight, is everything alright?”

The unicorn looked up to see her sister-in-law gliding down towards her, a worried expression on her face. “Cadence? I’m fine, but what are you doing back down here?”

Cadence landed on the stairs next to her and said, “I’d just gotten back to the top when I heard you cry out. And it sounded like you were talking to somepony afterward. Did you find something else?”

“Oh,” Twilight replied lamely. She was about to tell the alicorn about Sombra’s horn but remembered the horn’s words. She still wasn’t sure whether she had imagined it or not but decided not to say anything, all the same. “No, I just got scared by a shadow. I guess I should get some fresh air, too.”

“Well, as long as you’re alright,” Cadence said with a smile. The two sisters climbed the stairs together, and Twilight put Sombra’s horn from her mind.



* * *



As Twilight watched the Crystal Empire receding behind her, she settled into her seat on the train back to Ponyville. As she did, her mind returned to the horn still tucked away in her bags. The train car she was in was empty except for her, so she used her magic to levitate the horn out of its resting place to hang before her eyes. “Why didn’t I just give you to Cadence?” She thought aloud. “You would have deserved whatever she did to you…”

“Because you didn’t want to be responsible for my death.” Came the whispered voice once more. “Something I am grateful for, as my life is nearly all I have left.”

Twilight’s eyes widened at hearing Sombra’s voice again, but it no longer surprised her as much as it had before. “So, I didn’t imagine you! Why did you stop talking earlier, then?”

“I don’t exactly have a mouth anymore. My magic is all that sustains me, and communicating taxes what little power I have left.” Twilight could hear the strain in his voice, leading her to believe that he was speaking the truth.

“Well, I still think you deserve it,” Twilight said, though with less conviction than before. “And I still need to decide what to do with you. I can’t exactly bring you back to Ponyville. Then again, Princess Celestia and Princess Luna are busy for the next few days, so I can’t get any help from them right now.” Glancing back at the horn, she said, “Alright, I’m taking you to Ponyville for a few days, but if I detect even a trace of Dark Magic from you, I’m taking you back to the Crystal Empire right away, got it?”

Sombra was silent for a moment before assenting. “…If that is your demand.”

Nodding in satisfaction, Twilight tucked the horn away again, before turning to watch the countryside pass by.



* * *



As she stepped off the train in Ponyville, Twilight was immediately greeted by her assistant, the baby dragon Spike. “Twilight! So, how was your trip? Find out anything interesting?”

“A few things, Spike,” Twilight replied. “We found King Sombra’s journal, for one thing. C’mon, I’ll tell you about it on the way back to the library…”

Twilight headed back to her home, but all thoughts of Sombra and his journal were swept from her mind when she had to deal with a strange situation of her friend somehow making duplicates of herself. By the time she had dealt with there being too many Pinkie Pies, Celestia was already starting to lower the sun.

When she finally returned to the library, all Twilight wanted to do was get some sleep, after the long day she had. However, once Spike was safely asleep, Twilight's 'passenger' spoke up before she had the chance to join him.

“I’m impressed,” Sombra said suddenly, right after Twilight had set down her bags. “Finding a solution to such obscure magic so quickly is quite impressive indeed. I feel a bit less bad about my defeat, knowing that it was due to such a talented unicorn as yourself, Twilight Sparkle.”

Twilight blinked in surprise, caught off guard by the unexpected compliment. “Um, thank you, but it really wasn’t anything special.”

“Nothing special? My dear Twilight, I have lived for over a thousand years, and not since Starswirl the Bearded himself have I met a pony that could have resolved that situation as swiftly or cleanly as you did.” Sombra’s flattery of her continued. “You might even be talented enough to handle a few of my spells…”

That got Twilight’s attention. The lure of new magic was something that had never failed to intrigue her, ever since she cast her first spell. Excitedly, she pulled his horn out of her bag with her magic, and asked, “Really? Like what?”

“Oh, shapeshifting, manifestations, illusions, all the staples of Dark Magic.” Sombra replied offhandedly.

Twilight wilted when she heard him. “Oh, never mind, then,” She muttered, rubbing her horn at the memory of the last time she tried to use such power. “Dark Magic hurts too much to use, I’ll pass.”

“Let me guess, hornaches? Dizziness? Blurred vision?” Sombra replied in a knowing tone.

Twilight’s head whipped up in surprise, her eyes widening as Sombra described her symptoms perfectly. “What? How’d you know?” She asked, before coming to a realization. “Oh, right, you used Dark Magic all the time. I don’t know how you can stand it.”

“Actually, it doesn’t hurt me at all. I find using Dark Magic quite enjoyable, in fact,” the fallen king said smugly, before explaining, “Those symptoms only occur if you’re trying to use it incorrectly.”

“Using it incorrectly? What do you mean?” Twilight asked, intrigued once more. If she could use Dark Magic without it hurting her… suddenly Twilight remembered the different spells Sombra had listed off, and her mind was immediately filled with the various ways she could use such magic. However, when she got no response, she prompted him, “Sombra?”

“…My apologies… but it seems my powers are beginning to wane… and I must rest.” The horn said slowly, his fatigue starting to show in his voice. “I’ll be more than happy to tell you more tomorrow, however.”

“Oh,” Twilight said softly, disappointed about having to wait. “Well, good night, then.” Setting Sombra’s horn on her desk, she got ready for bed. Twilight quickly drifted off to sleep, dreaming of the joy of learning new magic the next day.

However, while she needed sleep, someone else did not. Although resting, Sombra remained fully conscious, just as he had while sealed away. And just as he had then, Sombra spent his time gathering his strength and thinking.

Unlike when he was trapped as a shadow, however, Sombra wished he had a mouth, if only so that he could grin. ‘Things aren’t exactly going to plan,’ Sombra thought, ‘but this situation may actually work out even better for me. Not only will I not be trapped in my study while I recover, but now…’

Sombra turned his attention to the unicorn sleeping nearby. ‘Twilight Sparkle,’ the fallen king’s thoughts continued. ‘You were one of the ponies most pivotal in my second defeat, and now, you may very well be the key to my revival… and perhaps more. But I’ll need to be careful. Other than your actions against me in the Crystal Empire, and what you did today, I know nothing about you. And I don’t like surprises.’

While it was true that speaking without a mouth require magic, Sombra had greatly exaggerated how much when talking to Twilight. In truth, it was barely noticeable, though every moment he spent speaking was one less moment that his power was building to the point that he could restore his body. Now, however, there was more at stake, and sometimes sacrifices had to be made, in order to gain greater power.

Sombra’s horn glowed with dark magic, as he focused his magic for another purpose. Magic made anything possible when used correctly. The magical aura lifted off his horn and changed into a floating green and red eye. With the smoky purple glow of dark magic around it, it bore a strong resemblance to King Sombra’s eyes before his form was shattered.

The eyed floated about Twilight’s residence, examining everything there was to see. He quickly came to realize one thing about his ‘host’; she REALLY loved books. While that knowledge wasn’t particularly useful to him, further examination revealed that most of the books were on magic, some on subject far more obscure than the casual practitioner would bother to read.

‘Excellent, it would seem her desire for knowledge is even greater than I could have hoped!’ Sombra thought, happier than he had been in a millennium. Of course, that was not saying much, considering the last thousand years had contained nothing but misery, imprisonment and defeat, for him.

Returning to the bedroom, he got his first good look at the mare that had given him this opportunity. True, he had seen her briefly in the Empire, but he far more important priorities at the time. And while he had spent most of the day in her presence, he had been unable to see before casting his most recent spell.

The first thing he looked to was her cutie mark. A cutie mark represented a pony’s special talent, and could give further knowledge to help manipulate her if he needed to do so. ‘Stars? Is her talent astronomy?’ Sombra thought, before putting what he saw together with the contents of her home. ‘No, MAGIC! Oh, the potential for such a talent! Hmm… perhaps thinking of her as merely a pawn would be a waste…’ He looked further, taking in her multicolored hair, and the color of her horn… ‘What a lovely purple, almost like…’

For a moment, it was not Twilight he saw lying there, but another unicorn who had lived a thousand years before.

Immediately, Sombra canceled his spell, his vision going dark once more. ‘No, Radiant Hope is long gone. And I’ll never make the mistake of opening my heart to another pony ever again.’

Although he could not sleep in his current state, Sombra did the next best thing, falling into a deep meditation, his mind wandering to what could have been, possibilities long lost.



Chapter 2: Practical Studies


Twilight woke up from a strange dream, in which she attacked another Twilight with Dark Magic while dodging floating pies. 'What a weird dream.' She thought.

Still, the reminder of what had been promised the night before excited her, waking her up completely in a matter of moments. Rushing downstairs to her desk as fast as she could without waking Spike, Twilight said, "It's morning! Have you rested enou- Sombra! What happened?"

The night before, she had left Sombra's horn sitting on her desk. Now, in its place was a blood-red crystal, with a black string tied through it like a necklace or pendant.

"Just a little disguise," came Sombra's reply. "After all, you wouldn't want your friends to find out about me, would you? After the kindness you've shown me, I would hate to cause you any hardships."

Twilight was surprised, not expecting that simply sparing his life would spark such gratitude from the ancient king. Meanwhile, Sombra was hoping that she would believe the excuse he had come up with, in order to make sure that word of him being alive did not get back to the Two Sisters or Princess Cadance.

"Well, um, thanks, I guess," Twilight said. However, her excitement quickly returned, and she asked, "So, are you going to teach me some of your magic now?"

"No." Sombra replied shortly.

"WHAT!?" Twilight cried out in annoyance. "But you said-"

"I said that you had talent," Sombra replied sharply. "However if you cannot harness Dark Magic correctly, it would be pointless for me to teach you anything else. A foal must stand before they can walk, and walk before they can run."

"So, you're saying that you'll only teach me your spells once I've learned how to properly use Dark Magic?" Twilight asked. "But I don't even know what I'm doing wrong!"

"Precisely, and thus, that is what we shall work on first." Sombra explained. "First, I want you to touch your horn to the crystal that mine has become."

Twilight hesitated. While she was eager to learn new spells, she had not forgotten who she was dealing with. "What are you planning to do?"

However, Sombra had his response ready. "My disguise will not be of much use if anyone hears me speaking. Thus, I will use some of my remaining magic to create a telepathic link between us. This will also make it require less power for me to communicate with you, and thus easier to teach you."

Given that explanation, Twilight nodded in understanding. "Alright, but remember: try anything funny, and I'm taking you back to Cadance in the Crystal Empire. Got it?"

"But of course," Sombra replied smoothly. His tone turned sad as he added, "I merely wish to pass on my knowledge to a worthy student, before my power runs dry, and I fade from this world forever." Of course, Sombra knew he could sustain himself indefinitely, even regaining his power slowly, when resting.

Twilight, however, had no way to know that, and his words swept aside any remaining suspicion she had, for the moment. Leaning down, she touched the tip of her horn to the crystal, as he had requested. A moment later, she felt Dark Magic emanate from Sombra's crystalline form and begin slowly traveling down her horn. It felt familiar, yet different, not hurting, but merely feeling strange. When it reached her skull, though, a sharp pain struck her, like a blade piercing her brain.

After what felt like an eternity, but was likely only a few seconds at most, the pain began to fade, and she heard somepony screaming. A moment after that, she realized it was her own voice she was hearing.

"Twilight! Are you okay? What happened to you?"

Cracking her eyes open, Twilight took stock of her surroundings. She was slumped on the floor in front of her desk, her front hooves pressed against her horn. Standing in front of her was the one who just spoke, her assistant Spike. The baby dragon looked worried, obviously having been woken up by her cry of pain.

"I, uh, tripped and hit my horn on the desk," Twilight said. "Sorry for waking you up."

"Really? You sounded like you were in pretty bad pain there. Does hitting your horn hurt that bad?" Spike asked, not having one himself.

"Y-yeah," Twilight replied, thinking quickly. Noticing how sore her throat was after that scream, and needing to distract him for a moment, she added, "In fact, it's given me quite the hornache. Think you could grab me a glass of water, Spike?"

"Sure thing, Twilight!" Spike said, eager to help, before scampering off to do as asked.

As soon as Spike was out of earshot, Twilight whirled around to face the crystal on her desk, and hissed angrily, "What in the hoof was that!? I told you if you tried anything-"

'There is no need to speak aloud, my dear Twilight. The spell was a success.' Twilight was cut off by Sombra's voice echoing in her head. 'Unfortunately, that was my first opportunity to use that spell since I conceived it, so I was unaware of it having such a painful side-effect.'

Before Twilight could think of a reply, Spike returned with the water she had requested. "Here you go, Twilight!" Spike said happily, happy to have been of assistance. "Are you feeling better?"

Genuinely thirsty, Twilight downed the glass of water and smiled at the baby dragon. "Much. Thanks, Spike."

"It was nothing!" Spike replied proudly. "Just doing what any Number One Assistant would do!"

Twilight wanted to start practicing right away so that she could learn Sombra's spells as soon as possible, but she knew Spike would overreact if he saw it. Suddenly, her eyes widened, as she was struck by an idea. "Say, since you've been such a great assistant lately, why don't you take the day off?"

"Huh? But what about you?" Spike asked. "Weren't you going to be practicing some new spells today?"

"Yeah, but… my horn's still sore, so I'm just going to rest today, instead." Twilight said, although part of her felt a bit guilty about how easily these excuses were starting to become for her. 'Still, I've made up my mind to learn what Sombra has to teach, and it won't harm Spike to be somewhere else while I practice.' Twilight thought.

However, someone heard that thought, and responded, 'Indeed,' Came Sombra's voice in her mind, 'Dark Magic can be volatile before it is mastered. It's clear how much you care for your friends, that you would forgo their aid to see them remain safe.' While the telepathic link did not let him truly read her mind, Twilight had not been as careful to guard her mind as he had, and some of her thoughts had leaked through, making Sombra realize that he needed to speak up to keep her from changing her mind about keeping his continued existence secret.

'That's right! I just want to make sure that I don't accidentally hurt Spike.' Twilight agreed mentally, Sombra's words making it much easier to justify her choice. The telepathic communication had transpired in mere moments, keeping Spike from noticing anything. Out loud, she said, "Why don't you go see what Rarity's doing? You won't miss much here."

Perking up at the mention of the unicorn who held his heart, Spike was eager to agree. "When you put it like that… Are you sure you won't need me today?" Despite his helpful nature making him ask, the young dragon was already moving towards the door.

Twilight just laughed, as she said, "Go on, Spike, have fun! You deserve a day off."

"Well, alright," Spike replied. As he left, he called out over his shoulder, "See you tonight, Twilight!"

As the door closed behind him, Twilight breathed a sigh of relief. 'Well, if you're quite finished wasting time trying to spare your minion's feelings, perhaps we can begin with your training.' Sombra voice sounded in her mind once more, a slight note of impatience coloring his tone.

"Hey! Spike's my friend, not my minion!" Twilight snapped back, forgetting that she did not need to speak aloud. "Besides, you haven't even told me what I did wrong yet."

'Oh, really? I was not aware that "friends" pandered to your every need so eagerly. And you certainly seemed to have no problem taking advantage of that.' Sombra replied snidely. 'Now, start channeling Dark Magic so that I can explain.'

"I do not take advantage of Spike!" Twilight cried out in anger, as her eyes began glowing green and the blackish-purple aura of Dark Magic surrounded her horn. "Now will you shut up about that and tell me how to do this without my horn hurt-!" Twilight stopped midsentence, as she realized her horn felt perfectly fine. "My horn doesn't hurt!" Turning to the crystal on her desk, she asked, "What's going on?"

Sombra laughed, before responding, 'Forgive me if my methods of teaching are a bit more direct than whoever taught you in the past. Dark Magic feeds off of powerful emotions, anger being the easiest for a beginner to invoke. Attempting to use it while the mind is calm causes the magic to inflict pain on the caster for it to feed off of, instead.'

As his explanation cleared the anger and confusion from her mind, Twilight felt the pain start to return, confirming his words. "So, you're saying I can only use it when I'm angry?" She asked, her annoyance at that lessening the pain, but not being strong enough to eliminate it entirely.

'No, any sufficiently powerful emotion can feed Dark Magic, but until you discover what works best for you, anger will be easiest for you to harness, especially since you were lucky enough to have me teach you.' Sombra's reply was undeniably smug.

"What do you mean by that?" Twilight asked warily.

Sombra was quiet for a moment, as he weighed the risk of his next words, but decided it was necessary. 'Do you realize how close you came to losing everything in the Crystal Empire?'

"Huh?" Twilight's confusion returned full force. "What do you mean?"

'I mean, if you had been just seconds slower finding the heart, I would have returned.' Sombra's voice hissed in her mind. 'If the Prince there had been just seconds slower reacting to my charge, I would have destroyed the Crystal Heart. If the Princess had been just slightly weaker, I would have caught her, and still claimed the Heart. If any number of things hadn't gone your way like they did… I would have won. And if I had, then my former slaves, your friends, and you would have all been at my mercy. And as for the Prince and Princess…'

Suddenly, an image filled Twilight's mind. A terrifying image of Princess Cadance and Shining Armor surrounded by dark magic and writhing in agony. Twilight's anger had been growing the longer the ancient tyrant went on, but that image caused her fury to peak. "Don't you dare threaten Cadance or my brother!" Twilight shouted at the crystal on her desk, while firing off the Dark Magic she had built up at it as well.

The blast was larger than she expected from an unfocused spell, completely destroying her desk and the wall behind it. Sombra's crystal, however, remained unscathed, protected by its own aura of Dark Magic. As Twilight stared in shocked at the destruction she just caused, she saw several ponies stare at her nervously through the hole, before hurrying on their ways.

'Most impressive,' Sombra spoke up before Twilight could act further. He was surprised to discover that the husband of the new Crystal Princess happened to be his student's brother, but he had more important things to focus on, at that moment. 'There truly is no denying your talent for Magic, Dark or otherwise. Whenever you find yourself struggling with what I have to teach you, remember those words, and that image. Hate me for what I did to you, those you love, and everypony else. Your wrath will fuel Dark Magic easily, allowing you to shape it as you wish.'

Twilight stared at Sombra's crystal in shock, understanding causing her anger to fade, but she knew that it would come back easily with such a memory. "Why?" Twilight whispered. "If you hadn't formed a shield, I could have…"

'Killed me?' Sombra finished in an amused tone. 'If you had succeeded, then I would not have been a very worthy teacher, now would I?' Sombra chuckled, before saying, 'I do need some rest after that, though. You should practice channeling Dark Magic while you clean up, and I'll teach you the first of my spells tomorrow.'

As Sombra fell silent, Twilight did as he suggested, her mind in a maelstrom. Part of her wanted to hate Sombra, even if what he had said was solely to motivate her. Yet, she was glad that she could start learning new magic. She was terrified that he had thrown her off balance so easily. At the same time, however, she could not help but admire how swiftly he had provided her with the means to use his style of magic.

'Conflicted' was an understatement.